um first up on the lineup is kia koiler
who is a writer artist gardener amateur
astronomer organizer and developer
interested in how cultural narratives
and technologies shape their use since
2017 she has led strategy at gnosis
developing decentralized infrastructure
for web3
now she focuses on building zodiac a
collection of tools built according to
an open standard for decentralized
autonomous organizations or dows
she also contributes to other internet
research group and sits on the board of
regen foundation
today kia koiler presents her
pre-history of dows so anybody new to
the crypto space we're going to walk you
through uh from the beginning to now
and with that i will turn it over to kia
hey i'm kia crutler and my talk is on a
pre-history of dials
cooperatives gaming guilds and the
networks to come
you can find me on twitter at kia
crutler and our team at nurses guilds
the term dao stands for decentralized
autonomous organization
it comes from imagining how features of
decentralized technology
like global digital assets censorship
resistance and automated actions will
change how organizations operate
daos today could also be described as
internet native organizations
the term dao first appeared in the
ethereum blockchain community in 2014.
the terms like decentralized autonomous
corporation or decentralized autonomous
company dac
circulated in the bitcoin space prior
the first experiment under the term's
name called vidao
monsters a decentralized funding
organization which raised over 150
million equivalent ether to native
currency to its code in 2016.
the experiment proved short-lived
however and the dow was hacked one month
after launch
and despite this a lot more experiments
have gone on in the dial space since
and i would argue that while the term
dao is new the ideas behind it aren't
you can see this in the form of networks
a popular term among think tanks of the
20th century
and seen in this 1995 report tribes
institutions markets networks by david
runfell and published by the rand
corporation
the report presents four types of
organizational forms through which
humanity has supposedly progressed
and key to this framework is not the
idea that one organizational form
replaces the next but rather that it
both supplements and curtails the one
that preceded it
and of relevance for daos
networks in the report
i have a key distinguishing feature from
the organizational forms that perceive
them
they're described as
multi-organizational meaning they
connect multiple organizations
and they facilitate the growth of
distributed web-like global enterprises
and increasingly so-called virtual
corporations
and neither public nor private the
primary domain of multi-organizational
networks is a third autonomous social
sector identified in the report as civil
society
and i'd like to bring up this report in
the context of dao's web 3 and internet
native organization discourse
because i think that the discourse today
whether knowing there or not inherits a
lot from reports like the one published
by rand
and rand was a non-profit think tank
establish or is a non-profit think tank
established in 1948
that went on to advise the us military
and government
and so a lot of the discourse around
internet native organization inherits a
type often of western liberalism as well
as a type of soft power that other civil
society organizational forms would go on
to export in the decades following the
90s
and i'm of the belief that the more you
recognize a lineage the easier it
becomes to change
and in this vein i would say that with
the report's emphasis on civil society's
three-letter acronyms for organizations
ngos npos and pvo's
a future one appears naturally missing
taos
so dallas today 1000 2021
dao's i would offer a working definition
might be best described as voluntary
associations with the operating
principles of digital cooperativism
and i say cooperativism here in the
sense that dallas do not embrace
necessarily an organizational form or
legal structure that looks like
traditional cooperatives but rather that
they embrace cooperativism more as a
protocol
a set of economic relations between the
members that prioritize co-ownership
and as voluntary associations they are a
cross-jurisdictional way for strangers
friends or unlikely allies to
pseudonymously come together towards
shared goals
usually supported by a token model
incentives and governance held in common
it's important to keep in mind that
dials are not reducible to technical
protocols for governance or the software
that they use
but rather they're communities that
coordinate through collective vibes
and today the dow landscape is blooming
with a bunch of different categories of
dials highlighted by cooper turley such
as protocol daos which steward the
development of decentralized software
there are service styles that offer
things like freelance work
there's investment in grand styles that
distribute funds
and there's collectors daos that collect
artworks as well as media dials that
seek to be a new type of media studio
and while not reducible to the software
it uses many joke today that daos are
simply a group chat and a bank account
and to give some specific instances of
what this looks like
most often dials today are comprised of
a discord server
which is a big multi-channel chat room
usually organized by topic
and a multisig offender notice a safe
multisig
and multi-signature accounts you can
think of kind of like um traditional
joint bank accounts except you can
create them online usually within a
couple of minutes synonymously across
jurisdictions with your friends and
here's a screenshot of a multi-sig by a
popular grants program in the blockchain
space
and this grants program is controlled by
four out of six owners
this means
multi-sig kind of directly translates to
multi-signature multiple signers have to
confirm a transaction in order for it to
go through
in this case four out of six although
every account can set it custom
and while deceptively simple as a piece
of software multi-sigs have become
really important for dows to set up and
get started quickly as a group that
wants to hold assets in common
and this is a screenshot of the pleaser
down multisig
pleaser dao is an art collector dao
and they've also issued an internal
governance token as well as an external
uh token for fractionalization of
ownership of the works that allows those
who to contribute to the dow basically
to vote on which artworks they will
acquire next
and i think what's most interesting from
from please or down collector dows in
general from an arts institutional
perspective
is that they often invite the artists
they collect to become members of the
dow in turn
which basically dissolves the usual
distinctions between artists gatherers
and collectors
and also because most dials represent
governance rights through a token in
some sense you could say token's trojan
horse principles of co-ownership so of
cooperatives directly into highly
financialized spaces
and while i think tokenization is far
from the answer to the social media web
2 woes
i would say that i think for daos with
the mission of economic value creation a
token becomes a useful mechanism on
three fronts
bootstrapping initial funding
distributing governance white rights
widely and granularly as well as
aligning an ecosystem of dows so not
only one organization but many
and in this light
and i would say since the space um is
relatively new there are very few kind
of guiding principles or norms around
value creation
i would offer one to say that web3
applications could aim to introduce
value in relations which have been
historically denied it
like labor and environment rather than
creating new financialized relations
this is where dials could learn much
from cooperatives
and cooperatives are enterprises managed
and owned by their members
and the 1844 rochdale principles for
cooperatives which are still embraced
and used by cooperatives today
outline a few key principles by which
they operate
so these include voluntary and open
membership member economic participation
as well as things like cooperation among
cooperatives
and while many daos might not draft this
list i would also counter that many
could have easily written this similar
list of values today
and perhaps where taos most strongly
intersect with the blockchain space
with the cooperative space is through
ideas like nathan schneider's exit to
community
so in a 2019 post he details a third
path so startups rather than giving the
initial ipo or a corporate acquisition
can choose a third way and share what
they've created with the people who
value it most
in the case of a social media platform
this could be giving co-ownership to its
users as well as governance rights about
how the platform develops
and in a great paper called fostering
worker cooperatives with blockchain
technology marsha edmund highlights
three dilemmas cooperative space today
these relate to basically raising
initial funds
international governance as they scale
across borders and face bureaucratic
hurdles and also alignment both
bureaucratic and cultural coherence as
cooperatives increase in size
and definitely not the panacea to
cooperative dilemmas but one potential
solution certain dow patterns
highlighted before related to
bootstrapping initial funding widely
distributing governance rights and
aligning not only one organization but
many could be of use
daos also could learn from cooperatives
and their emphasis on long-termism so
long-term patterns about how economic
assets should be held as well as the
well-being of the members and the
environment they participate in
dallas can also learn from gaming guilds
so in massively multiplayer online games
mmos
players are mostly free to set their own
goals loosely guided by the open game
world narrative
refer to an mmo as broadly as guilds
clans or alliances
these groups average in size between 40
to 150 participants though they can go
up to a thousand in size
and their goals could include defeating
difficult enemies or constructing useful
tools basically anything that's usually
out of the scope of one player acting
alone
this includes mega projects like uh
constructing a titan class warship in
iman line
and what guilds have realized is that
it's really important for the same
players to work together again because
they usually have characters with
complementary skill sets as well as
established patterns of cooperation
and key to guild members working
together again is the distribution of
loot or the distribution of resources
and its perceived fairness
so loot our in-game items usually
dropped after a successful mission
and to deal with their distribution many
guilds have established different
systems for keeping track of
participation
one of the most robust and resilient is
the 1999 system dragon kill points which
has evolved greatly since and is used in
many game servers today
and you could say that dkp act as a
private money system
separate from any existing currency in a
game world and they're distributed to
guild members based on their
participation and rates
and then guild members can in turn spend
these participation points or private
money in exchange for loot items in a
transparent manner
and out of the scope of this talk
there's a great paper called dragon kill
points a summary white paper by
castronova in fairfield that delves into
one world of warcraft server's gkp
system that's absolutely fantastic
and i would say that these kind of guild
patterns of dragon kill points or dkp
as well as autonomous dispute resolution
so ways to resolve dispute between guild
members without resorting to traditional
um legal forms usually as well as the
market allocation of publicly owned
goods as you see in many dkp systems
could greatly inform several dow
dilemmas today
so at the moment a lot of dials are
really struggling with how to adequately
and considerately and meaningfully track
reputation participation and
contribution among their members
in that turn they struggled to
distribute resources fairly
by looking towards systems like dkp
dallas could also increase trust and and
kind of also show that
often with the kind of meme around
blockchain technology being trustless it
overshadows the fact that teams often
working as smaller teams within daos
need to work together repeatedly and
develop
develop a level of coherence and trust
i think dallas can also learn um
from gaming guilds with particular
insights raised by researcher joshua
citarella
um that many dkp systems resemble a form
of market socialism
in which goods are publicly owned but
allocated by markets
and i think shadow economics could be an
out term for like this for when a group
operates through an economic form it
would not be likely to label itself as
so this is daos as digital cooperatives
and gaming guilds as market socialism
as many dials would might not explicitly
embrace the label of cooperatives and
maybe gamers might not explicitly call
themselves market socialists they still
engage in economic practices which
resemble these forms
and as the blockchain socialist writes
um we should be building organizing
platforms owned by users and workers
where it doesn't matter that someone
tweets something you might disagree with
but whether or not they are helping us
reach concrete political objectives
and here whether you disagree with a
twitter handle or otherwise dao's hold
some opportunity
and i think in dao's ambiguity and their
kind of a historicity there is an
opportunity for collaboration across
existing ideologies and polarization
divides
and also on the flipped term
of this like a huge opportunity for
experimentation with different economic
practices we also face the real
possibility that dials are cooperatively
better or worse for different ends at
the moment and this is why i really
encourage more people to get involved in
this space now when it's a little bit of
upstream of these experimentation
impacts
and in terms of doubts to come and their
impacts does after 2021.
so i think that daos will not be the
uniformly non-hierarchical network some
imagine
although they will have pockets of flat
hierarchies
instead i think dials will coordinate
across different levels of coherence and
trust
and i could roughly sketch out three
layers of a dow
there would be a token
and then teams guilds and squads
represented by token ownership
that often work together on missions
milestones and raids or larger scale
public works that are financed by token
ownership
and from these layers something like a
hierarchical network emerges meaning an
organization that possesses the ability
to be ranked in multiple ways
so from the perspective of wandao such
as daobi in a given ecosystem of daos
you could see a series of teams and
goals
and from another dao dassey's
perspective we could see overlapping
goals and teams collaborating towards
similar ends but a different hierarchy
emerges
and because programmable tokens can be
distributed in a more granular way to
teams like such
one of the promises of dao is that
they've yet to deliver on but still
people kind of hold as something like a
holy grail or an ideological endpoint
is that because they can be distributed
in a more granular way than traditional
corporate interests memberships or
shares
the possibility for a new type of token
holder company formation comes to the
fore
which can incorporate incorporate
greater practical knowledge in
governance without increasing
transaction costs
or in other words decreasing
organizational efficiency
and this idea of incorporating greater
practical knowledge or tacit knowledge
in governance i think is most clearly
shown by the regen network
which is a public blockchain for
ecosystem services that has set aside 30
percent of their tokens for land
stewards climate scientists and
indigenous peoples
to take part in managing the value the
network produces as well as governance
of the protocol in the long term
and that way you get
literally on the ground stakeholders
involved in your governance process over
the long term kind of
economic outcomes of their field
and for this reason it's important to
look beyond token governance
so while tokens can distribute
governance rights we should also move
beyond token voting as the first
solution to decision making
instead we can look to identity systems
like proof of personhood systems proof
of participation
retroactive public goods funding as well
as other mechanisms to combat vote
combat vote buying or other issues
i would also offer that tokens are in
some sense a new form of digital object
that will take time to establish norms
around
so these won't always look like
traditional corporate shareholders
stakeholder rights and they won't always
look like economic assets but instead
will become a more programmable form of
governance that highlights opportunities
that we've yet to articulate but we'll
soon
and so it's some and i would also say
here um that because tokens have
primarily built worlds around
speculation and exit many are not keen
to get involved with the space
but i would also say that as new types
of tokens emerge they will build worlds
around entrance too
attaching to how physical resources are
governed
and in summary gamer guilds cooperatives
using software and group chats often
daos look at these forms and say oh my
god
is this an entirely new organizational
form in the history of human
civilization
and while it's not today i would
actually offer that it potentially could
be
so i think in the networks to come their
digital primacy meaning that they
initially organize online and also
manage digital assets primarily allow
some not to take seriously the fact that
things like cooperative principles plus
gaming guilds and odd imaginaries like
dao's present an emergent organizational
forum with legitimate political
relevance
and why i think it's important to give
things like dao's political relevance
today is because we don't want those on
the other side of the digital divide to
suddenly realize that they haven't been
included in stakeholders when this does
become a legitimate political form or
really operationalizes in mainstream
practice
and that's why we should actively
cultivate more and more stakeholders in
these organizations while they're still
young
and i would offer one kind of specular
form
through which different organizations
and daos could participate in the
political sphere and transform towards
more impactful ends for better or worse
once again
and i'll quickly read a paragraph from
my essay by the same name and prehistory
of taos towards the speculative end
so to call attention to the chimeric's
terms failings at seriousness
many return to its misnomer
the a endow does not live up to its
autonomous reference
and even though the term now remains
poetically correct
we could propose an occasional
replacement decentralized avatar
organizations
such organizations would take their
political stakes both lightly and
heavily
as audrey tang notes the days of avatar
politicians are already here
avatar politicians are virtual beings
that represent rally and advocate on
behalf of political platforms
and when automation increases they may
even spawn their own political platforms
a decentralized avatar organization
would recognize the coming virtual
zeitgeist
this could look quite like collectively
managed cyborg like low michaela
or an entire environment shaped by
members like trust moving castles
and decentralized avatar organizations
will have collectively developed
interoperable game worlds engines or
virtual being mascots at their core
which co-create the culture around which
their members organize
and as is the case in this example and
speculation with massively multiplayer
online games
i would say that dials are less
technical protocols for governance and
more high stakes game world center reef
and we should treat them as such
because we may say things like dao
versus pac our political action
committee so a fundraising committee for
political candidates or party lines in
the united states
as soon as 2024 before then
for this reason we must remember that we
need to aim not only for code but we
should aim for rough consensus and
running worlds
thanks and you can find this talk and
hopefully a longer more nuanced esti
form
at our blog gnosisguild.mirror.xyz
as well as some more info about the dow
tools that we work on at nurse's guild
everybody welcome back um i'm joined
here today by executive director of gray
area barry through and kia koitler who
just walked us through a pre-history of
dao's
um thank you so much for that
presentation kia it was so informative
and i think these are histories that
people you know often uh you know are
you know many most people i that i see
in the christian space are definitely
unaware of how you know this trajectory
came to be so i found that super super
useful
thank you so much very happy to be here
yeah absolutely
um so before i kind of jump into you
know some of the questions that i have
um i was wondering if you could tell us
a little bit about the
you know the origin of the origin of
zodiac the origin of gnosis safe which i
know that you're deeply you know that's
your project um and kind of how you how
you became you know enmeshed in these in
these conversations around security and
community organization
and blockchain technologies
sure so it's been a bit of a journey
i studied more philosophy and art and
then over a period of several years i
kind of self trained as a developer and
did a lot of community organizing around
the distributed cooperative space and
then when ethereum started really
getting going
you know post 2016 um i saw
a kind of interesting confluence of
different interests of my own but also a
really interesting opportunity for
different types of organizing which i
think was in large part overshadowed by
much of the dominant press narratives
around crypto today
and basically a year after i got more
mesh in the kind of ethereum ecosystem
i've joined tenocis which is the company
i'm still working at today and i've done
strategy and comms there for the last
four years
and it's been a really amazing process
to see both how our team or now teams
have developed as well as how the space
is developed
both in summaries for amazing work in
some areas for less so
and basically
how gnosis has evolved over time is that
we built
some prediction market platforms and
general frameworks that people could use
for event-based assets and then also
there's products like the nurse's safe
which has come a long way since it's
initially written by our cto
to hold kind of gnosis funds in general
and then gradually was updated 100
through a lot of security processes and
has become pretty much the most trusted
uh smart contracts or kind of code in
the space and used by many many projects
today many teams you can set it up in 60
minutes just on a website that anyone
can go to
um so gnosis safe became one of the
gnosis core products almost by accident
although today all of the design around
it is very intentional and the use
within communities is very intentional
and
through my process hypnosis i was always
very interested more so in the kind of
governance aspect of crypto rather than
the kind of market-based
solutions let's say
and
as gnosis has evolved and we now have
several products lines there's also a
dex
we maintained an ethereum client as well
and gnosis has become a kind of
generalized decentralized infrastructure
company basically making tech that goes
across ethereum and probably any other
evm or just technically compatible
chains in the future
and from this and my interest in
governance i've had the opportunity with
uh
currently called co-founder orrin
mcmillan to basically formulate and
bring together a small team within
gnosis to work on gnosis guild and
zodiac so gnosis safe you can think of
as in a presentation like something like
a traditional joint bank account but one
that you can make online very quickly
with a team with an organization
and we were using this actually for
gnosis dao and initializing gnosis dao
which is a project that gnosis does to
kind of do community stewardship of the
gnosis products and the nurses treasury
and we realized in initiating gnosis dao
that there was a lot of tools that daos
need that
actually aren't built at the moment
so
oren and i saw this opportunity to
basically build on gnosis safe
and a tool set that fundamentally at its
core really allows organizations to
evolve so you have the gnosis safe
wallet
trusted holds funds you can set it up
really easily
but
i think what is missing in the dell
space more from the product side today
is that many platforms have kind of one
governance style one voting style one
way to gain membership and when you set
up this platform you're kind of
for better or worse locked in you can
change some parameters of this
governance style like how long it takes
a vote to pass or the kind of required
bond for more secure proposals but the
fundamental kind of governance style
can't necessarily evolve
whereas gnosis guild tooling and zodiac
which we're calling it is like a
collection of tools an open standard on
which gel tools can be built
and we use the gnosis safe at its core
but basically put these tools around the
safe so that an organization can evolve
over time they're like living breathing
organisms rather than static you know
web 2 platforms and so the zodiac tool
set allows uh teams and nurses safe to
take a bunch of different organic
pathways to how the an organization
could evolve so some of the tools that
we've built are things that um right now
with the gnosis safe there's like as i
mentioned in the talk there's like a set
amount of signers given a decision say
four out of six people have to confirm a
transaction for it to be executed
using zodiac you can basically have a
tool that allows any successful proposal
to the gnosis safe to be executed by
anyone in the community not just people
who have signing power on the nurse's
safe so it's a way to open organizations
and also open access to resources
without having to change the fundamental
underlying technical infrastructure you
just kind of build on it and plug and
play and evolve and we kind of joke
about it as uh the expansion pack for
daos um like in the same way that video
games you kind of have like existing
story lines or existing characters but
then later the developers or even
sometimes spurred by community
storylines the developers come up with
an expansion path that basically
connects different story lines can bring
new areas to the map can evolve certain
characters and basically
as the expansion pack for dao is seeking
to build on existing tech and really
bridge across different platforms into
different organizing practices rather
and keeping it fully and open standard
so that we don't end up with the same
kind of singular monolithic platform
that platform paradigm that has evolved
from web to
wow i mean this is such amazing work
because i think for me the
like i i agree with you i think that the
governance uh side of crypto
conversations are are
much more interesting than the
transactional ones right now because of
the capacity for community organization
for transparency for connection with
other people and then the management of
those resources um you know outside
outside of gray area festival i work i
work on technology diplomacy initiatives
for the canadian government actually and
so we talk a lot about governance and
building tools from the ground up so
that they are built ethically securely
um and uh you know are and they're
rooted in you know human rights but also
in something that is truly valuable for
for every user um and i'm wondering how
you approach
this how do you approach this kind of
ethical development of this governance
protocol right like you know i'm sure
that you want to build something that is
baked in to be something that cannot be
abused or used in improper ways and kind
of what's your
tactic and to you know to
make sure that your
the product that you're developing um is
is rooted in in positive impact
sure so there's a few different ways to
approach those questions
and i think all of them are equally
important
on a kind of
more technical side i would say that the
tool set that we're building
fundamentally wants to build
organizations that are more accessible
to a broader membership but also
organizations as i said that can evolve
over time so this means that there could
be a vote passed to actually change the
voting style because often you find an
organizations the ability to make
decisions or to decide about the formal
processes by which decisions are made um
is sometimes not possible
and you see this actually as a
fundamental pattern within a lot of
existing tech or social platforms and
daos that they're actually the kind of
fundamental governance processes are
very rarely part of the debate
um so on a technical infrastructure
layer
we want to assure that changing an
organization is always possible
by whatever kind of due process or
otherwise and also that it can basically
be ported across platforms and never be
linked specifically one
i do think that this question of um kind
of the impact framework is much more on
the cultural pattern side
so i like to think of like technical
objects as their technical
infrastructures of course they're not
always technical or not only technical
they're also social and cultural and
political in nature
and just being able to see how technical
objects kind of create and have a
feedback with cultural patterns
so it's the question of what type of
cultures do dials have and i think it
varies in terms of like what is the
ethics of the application of the dao
based on giving contacts and its end so
there isn't necessarily one prescriptive
norm across all daos but by being able
to build technical patterns that are
replicated as cultural patterns like
being able to update the organization's
governance process over time
then we can have kind of soft norms that
allow um
in my opinion like an ability to even
kind of talk about cooperatives in the
dial space did not exist until we were
able to have tooling that was more
accessible to people
because previously it was um you had to
be much more technically involved in the
ecosystem able to participate so
building technical tools that increase
cultural patterns of participation i
would say information symmetry the kind
of principle that uh
what for those at any tier inside or
outside of an organization information
should be made accessible if it's a kind
of public impact organization that's
very important
um but there isn't necessarily one
prescriptive norm just like a collection
of tools for a different set of cultural
patterns
wow i mean that's it seems like a
it's it's
such an exciting space because it feels
really new in a lot of ways and it's
also just really exciting because the
excitement from the community about the
new tools being developed the new
possibilities um you know it there's so
much energy in in this space at the
moment
let me ask you a question from the other
direction um
so
and it's you know basically winds up you
know or
boils down to what
um
how can
more quote unquote traditional
organizations such as gray area
but like what role do they play in this
development because it's fairly
interesting you know we
i guess sort of share a lineage with a
lot of these post-war kind of art and
technology organizations and it's one of
the antecedents right where
the idea is to um one of the things
we're up to is these collaborations
between art and technology on
organizational or corporate level
um
largely it hasn't worked with some
notable exceptions like they don't you
know it doesn't
that
idea of integrating artists into these
traditional companies in san francisco i
can tell you from people doing it for
you know 30 years now it hasn't worked
um
but the interesting thing is in web3 it
kind of is just happening organically
you have cultural movements that are
pushing technology development and tools
you have those supporting different
sorts of cultural structures and things
like that
so like beyond um you know we have the
advantage of being
a brick and mortar space that has like
people doing things with
physical things in space but
so beyond
something like just okay we have to
adopt these tools to survive in a
certain
sense if it's the future you know like
get on board
from the other direction what do you
think kind of
daos are lacking that some of the arts
organizations and other cultural you
know what you call it civil society
organizations that are out there can
contribute
from the other direction
sure so i think there's a few
key ways that could be pursued
um
i think
as i also mentioned in the talk just
like
i think
traditional kind of organizational
and kind of almost management consulting
style work within from dallas and back
and forth basically looking at how some
dials have that kind of reduced divide
between artists galleries collectors but
also vice versa kind of um
role management or knowledge management
is something that institutions do have a
leg up on in terms of just having
internal processes not always
very well but to some extent um and just
having like an idea of what the
institutional knowledge is over time
so basically being able to have this
type of uh
institutional memory and gathering and a
strong sense of the archive uh that i
think daos are really starting to grab
onto but um are still in their younger
phases of understanding what it means to
have like an on-chain organization but
also just one that preserves its own
archive over time like a kind of
mnemonic institution
i think
what i would like to see is um
maybe not across the board with uh but
with many key aligned institutions is
that i think dallas have not yet gotten
to the stage where they're able to be
kind of multi-organizational networks
and so in the sense that you have many
different institutions
and i always ask like when people come
to me saying oh we want to become a dao
i say well what is it you're trying to
decentralize is it membership is it
access to resources
um and often that that is really much
more implicit than people think it is um
it seems obvious but it's usually not
the actual first answer
and i think that what organizations can
do is kind of decentralize the network
in which they persist and have stronger
languages between institutions
so i think that they could play a role
in kind of becoming a node within a
given dao network and include their
members and their audience in this kind
of network of institutions that have
become kind of dalified let's say and
have one general kind of
higher level mission that's shared
across them
and that would be super powerful in
terms of building dow
kind of memory gathering or
institutional archives and also just
increasing network resilience so
short answer is participating as
organizations within a larger dow
network of aligned institutions
it's um
it's certainly you know an exciting
possibility
and you know it's going to be
interesting to see how
different institutions are able to adapt
and input and implement some of these
tools in order to create more equitable
organizational and decision-making
strategies um
you know amidst all of it you know this
is
you know i would love to this is kind of
a simple question but i'd love to know
just from your perspective because
there's a lot of rhetoric um on the
internet about that really goes down a
very starkly utopian or very starkly
dystopian pathway and there doesn't seem
to be a lot of discourse kind of in the
middle um and i'd love to know just from
your perspective
what projects or opportunities are most
exciting to you right now in in this
space and what things are you nervous
about or would you caution folks to be
wary of
sure i think what i'm most excited about
is um
i kind of particularly in the context of
this conversation a transfer of
resources which also translates into a
transfer of more institutional power to
artists or potentially to
people who might not traditionally with
at least within the past several decades
have had access to these things as
easily of course there are still
questions and maybe on the to answer on
the flip side of this i think um being
able to address questions of class and
that actual distribution um have not
fully been encompassed
and i think that also potentially what i
see is the more negative side is that
as uh nathan schneider recently remarked
is like when you open dial platforms
often the thing that you first see is
like a transaction list or a treasury
balance so basically it's the fact on
one side there's there's many things i
could answer for both but in the context
of this conversation on one side i'm
very excited for this transfer of
resources aka transfer of institutional
power to artists on the other side i'm
very worried about that becoming the
main form of
of institutional power of that
financialization um
and i think that there are things that
consuming this like
you know if a multi-sig open to a group
chat rather than a transaction list um
and really like what is the game if it's
not um
a kind of purely uh financially
financial end game like what is the
actual institutional power a few layers
beneath that
um these are i think the most important
questions that like
you can dive into the space and work on
today because it's still we're still so
far i think upstream from the impact
that it will have
that working on it now could have
greater impact
totally um
that though that's a i i love that
answer um and i think it's just so
thoughtful and just speaks to how
thoughtfully you're thinking about
building these tools and making them
available to people um just so everybody
knows i dropped some links in the chat
to gnosis and to the zodiac project so
you can check out how those work and
learn a little bit more there and
there's also the um there's an article
on mirror that's uh
i think for people to read and the
previous one that's on uh
identities and uh inventories
yeah we'll drop all of those um and
share them afterwards as well um but we
have a couple of questions from the
audience um that i'd love to to bring to
your attention one comes from one of my
favorite nft artists uh digital coleman
um and he asks how do dows think about
or deal with passiveness or lack of
participation due to time i may be
invested in many spaces but not have
time to be active in them all and i
think this is a really interesting
question because you know just from my
own experience participating on twitter
and in discord rooms with different
kinds of um uh crypto communities it's a
lot of there's a high attention demand
um and i can see that becoming a problem
for folks who can't
participate at that kind of level
sure so yeah this is a
pretty common pattern this space that a
lot of dallas face like voter apathy
um and many doubts kind of seek to
overcome this through like token female
which is obviously not the answer
um
there's i think that we're seeing a
shift and coming from
like initiative related to the crypto
space but it's like they also
tangentially outside like black swan and
others which is just a group of artists
thinking through basically daos without
blockchain
but the question of um how can you make
kind of governance and events so what if
you had kind of specific votes or other
things kind of become more forthright
and more fun to participate in
i personally think um
and it's this is a bit in the talk a bit
in the essay but like that dallas should
go more towards like a network of teams
rather than a kind of thinking through a
whole large scale organization that has
one flat governance process across
all of the decisions
because what i want to see is like more
as i say like tacit knowledge or
practical knowledge basically more
people who have experience related to a
specific proposal or a specific
initiative
be kind of ushered into participating in
that decision specifically and of course
they can participate in others not to
block off in that way but making sure
not that everyone participates in every
proposal but that the people who have
related experience at stake have
discoverability and access to the
proposals that are most related to them
is to me like the more promising way to
combat uh voter apathy and also to
combat i think what is like a failure of
um thinking through like one overarching
governance to
process to fit an entire token network
absolutely totally um
that's an interesting way to to to
approach this this problem um i mean
this is not something that is you know
relegated to the cryptos but i think is
relegated to you know it
applies to all spaces of labor and
technology and social media um you know
and i hope that you know through
decentralized technologies maybe we can
maybe this can be an opportunity to push
back against some of the demands of the
attention economy um we have another
question from the audience that comes
from oddball
and they ask it seems like most dao's
voting systems are based on majorities
but often we see majorities can be
oppressive to minority voices and
interests have you seen any attempts at
balancing the voting systems to bring
equity to the underrepresented
sure so there's a few like really
lower level things that need to be
implemented right now like one for my
team uh that we're i think we're going
to tackle is potentially like
zero knowledge proof voting but
basically um
uh private voting systems because i mean
there's the majority problem but there's
also a collusion problem particularly
when votes are public that leads often
to kind of majority voting so that's a
really basic level of infrastructure
that needs to become more common for
the problem highlighted here
there's also other voting systems like
conviction voting um which i suppose
still still could go the majority side
but the basic premise behind conviction
voting that's interesting
is basically that
rather than having a vote at one time
you continuously signal your preference
so if you say like
yes i would like to fund this community
project from our treasury and you say
yes at the beginning your vote becomes
more powerful over time as long as you
hold that yes position however
potentially something could change
before the decision is made or
potentially it's funding on a kind of
longer basis and then you might switch
your vote to no and so you've lost the
kind of strength of your vote and
basically what you have is a kind of
continually signaled preference from
everyone in the organization every time
that it's not a plutocratic and it's
also not necessarily like a one person
one vote it's like one person one
continuous signal um so there's a lot of
interesting granular governance
mechanisms that don't exactly look to
like the instant of voting um that we
get a lot of the kind of
um what some might call problems with
majority voting
yeah absolutely and i mean thinking
about governments and i mean voting just
makes me think about you know barry was
mentioning the application for arts
institutions and you know i'm also
interested in kind of the larger policy
side of this conversation you know um
it's diff i think it's difficult for
bureaucratic organizations institutions
governing bodies to
adapt to technology in a way that's
expedient with the progress of
innovation
and that's been a age old problem since
the beginning of since the beginning of
you know
uh you know the invention of the wheel
um and
i'm wondering
how
like how would you like to see
this technology or how even do you
envision this technology being
included in
like government policy or practice like
how should legislators think about
dealing with these kinds of new
organizational and voting structures
yeah i guess
there's a few that i i could answer that
question in like the immediate present
um but i think maybe the more
interesting answer is the one on like a
five to ten year outlook
and that i do think like something like
protocol governance so the idea that you
have a collection of assets related to a
particular mission held by a specific
network and that decisions about that
mission that are capitalized will be
needs will need to have be enacted by
this network and then i do think that
we'll see this as an increasing kind of
governance form whether it's on local
level you know say city dows or just um
general kind of uh
let's say chain networks
um and that thinking through kind of
protocol governance as a legitimate
political process um now in order to
observe the new types of cultural
patterns it creates in five to ten years
i think is when
the real um
political incorporation can be done i
think right now the kind of
current legislative outlook really needs
to have more insight into what's
happening
on a factual level
i also think
i also think like
dao's um
propose a certain kind of new aspect to
political
organizing related to being able to
preserve their memory directly like
through the action of it
and that this is really promising for um
specifically civic or public
institutions
and that um basically those institutions
being able to go to dallas now and be
like this is our archive this is our
wiki this is how we do it and then
working together can produce that type
of incorporation
it's you know it's going to be a long
road and it's going to take a lot of
time and consultation um
you know i think that um
it's you know there's this such a
complex problem and i think you know
it's going to be it's going to be one
step at first just to get governing
bodies uh you know
national governments to
accept cryptocurrencies this legitimate
currency i know we just saw this happen
in brazil um uh but it's it's gonna be
it's gonna be slow
it's still early days and i think you
know it's really that's interest you
know going back to the title of your
talk of pre-history of dao is really
speaking to how this is just the
beginning of something this is you know
a small seed of something that's going
to grow and grow in the coming in the
coming years
we have one more question from the
audience
and this person asks how do we reckon
with the need for member scale endows
and the complexity that more members
bring
so i think
um
partially related to an early answer of
having teams or having kind of people
who have deep practical knowledge
in certain areas in which the dow
operate and their ability to discover
proposals as well as opportunities
related to their experience and their
objectives
and really right now
i think daos need a focus and other
internet the research group is doing a
lot of work on this
but basically on information
discoverability because right now it's
quite strewn across chat rooms across
forums
across different governance votes and
different platforms
so focusing on information
discoverability so that there is still
coherence for people who are
participating to find the mission and
area they want to participate
means that um
not everyone needs to kind of apply
themselves or read all of the
documentation of course that's welcome
um but basically being able to to have
broadly aligned
a pluralism of missions which people can
work on that are broadly aligned will be
one way to address issues of scale
and yeah i think i think right now it's
like a promise that dao's doubts will
scale and that's like their main
ideological promise and it's you know
what does it mean the skeleton needs to
get bigger okay like that's that's only
so interesting i think like can
can they scale to the not necessarily
grow in membership size but can they um
potentially access greater expertise and
decision making or deeper practical
tacit knowledge
or kind of more stakeholders who should
be involved in governance processes and
then basically surface their experience
and also surface better information
discovery from the knowledge knowledge
management and put those two together
um that would be the ideal outcome
rather than just kind of
increasing an organization's size let's
say
totally oh that's really interesting
that's a problem that i hadn't i hadn't
thought about before you know some of
these groups are getting so huge and i
mean it's you need a whole per you know
groups like friends with benefits this
uh social token you know i know that
they like you know hire people to manage
other social media because it's gone
beyond something that you know uh
anybody and you know a small team can
manage without you know robust support
um
we're just about out of time you know
and kia i really thank you for your time
julian barry do you have any uh last
questions um for kia
it's all you julia
um i mean this is this is all like
amazing and very much like outside of my
knowledge base at least i feel that way
but
i mean maybe you can i know you sort of
entered your talk but maybe you could
talk a little bit about your like create
your creative practice and what some of
the outcomes
of your like creative work look like i
know you're doing a lot of writing and
um
so i'd be interested to hear how that's
how like your research is manifesting in
a creative
output
sure so i think particularly with the
zodiac project so the kind of collection
of dow tools we just launched was the
project that i've had probably the most
autonomy to work on with our team
and it's been really nice to kind of
combine my interests both
in like
kind of symbolic resilient knowledge
systems which is what i consider like
psychiatrical uh
symbols and also just my interest in
organizing and i guess less from a
social practice lens but just from
personal experience i think
uh
as like an artist in this space before i
always felt like
i needed to work on the infrastructure
to enable the art that i wanted to make
and a lot of that infrastructure was
based on being able to
kind of gather resources for many groups
but also technical infrastructure for
groups to coordinate and like work
together
and that i always thought of it as like
building the infrastructure to make the
work and not making the work but then
building the infrastructure also became
like fundamentally embedded with the
work
and that i see that in the future like i
think writing is probably my dominant
art practice at the moment and being
able to almost kind of create a sci-fi
narrative that can be implemented in
practice
and actually build tools that people can
use from that
i don't believe that art has to be
useful in any way but i think it is
really interesting when art can create
like cultural patterns that other people
can use that are also technical objects
and i'm just i'm really enjoying that at
the moment yeah that's really exciting
i love no that's that's a really
beautiful way to think about it because
i you know i think that a lot of people
like you know you what you what you
mentioned reminded me of you know work
by travis smalley for instance who
creates drawing tools and you know his
practice became he was really obsessed
with digital drawing tools and then he
started building his own and that became
the the you know became such a huge part
of his practice um and i think that it's
also a really interesting way to think
through the theme of the festival
welding protocol you know if you you
know it's not just about the output it's
how we think through the processes as
well at every uh you know kind of every
step of the way um so it's really cool
to hear
thank you so much kia for being here i
think we're just out of time we've kept
you longer than we probably should have
so thank you thank you thank you yeah
yeah thanks for staying on it's
nighttime in lisbon so
yeah
get to the party or whatever yeah of
course cheers from southern portugal
thank you all so much and take care
thank you